Hello, how are you?
Hi
I'm Dr Chao-Yo Cheng. I am the
lecturer in Quantitative Social
Research at Birkbeck.
In this video, we will discuss
some fundamentals of logit
regression,
one of the most widely used
regression techniques among
quant social researchers when we
have to analyze a dependent
variable that can only take one
of the two values, usually zero
or one.
In Part I, I'm going to review
some of the key fundamentals of
OLS to explain the reasons for
many quant scholars to believe
we must use a different
regression approach to study a
response variable that can only
take either zero or one.
Quant researchers usually call
list type of variables binary or
binomial.
In Part II, I'm going to cover
the key concepts and the key
rationale behind logit or
logistic regression.
Our first task is to understand
why logic regression allows us
to model a binary or binomial
dependent variable.
We will also pay attention to
some of the important practical
issues when we try to apply
logit regression to
infer the statistical
relationship between our
predictors and the binary
outcome variable.
At the same time I will also try
to use logit regression to
highlight the broader rationale
behind other generalized linear
regression models.
We're not going to cover all
generalized linear models in
Advanced Quantitative Social
Research.
However, I hope today's video
will give you some basic ideas
and you can bring these ideas
further to learn other more
advanced modeling techniques in
other modules or other courses.
So by now you should be
relatively familiar with the key
fundamentals of the least
squares linear regression or OLS.
Depending on the number
of predictors,
you can either specify a
bivariate linear regression
model or a multiple linear
regression model.
In practice, we usually only use
multiple linear regression model
in research because it is very
unlikely to imagine a scenario
such that we can only -- or we only
need one single predictor or
independent variable to generate
any insightful understandings
are with respect to our outcome
variable.
What is more important here
is if we exclude any important
predictors or independent
variables in our linear
regression model, it's very
likely we are going to get very
biased results in terms of the
estimated intercept and slopes
And keep in mind a relatively
good model specification
requires a solid understanding
of the topic or the subject
matter.
It is also very important that
we avoid some common pitfalls
that we have highlighted in
other lectures and the modules.
For one thing we should avoid
when we are trying to specify a
multiple linear regression
model, including two predictors
that are collinear with each
other, which is should also
avoid the depending on our
squares.
We should also avoid depending
on R-squared as the main
metric of model fit as a generic
R-squared may be artificially
inflated as we include more than
one predictor when we use
multiple linear regression
analysis, we can instead say use
adjusted R-squared to evaluate
model fit.
Although it is very important to
know, we should still take
adjusted R-squared on with a
grain of salt.
And at the same time we can also use
ANOVA to compare the performance
across different model
specifications.
Finally, before I conclude this slide,
Uh, when we try to use different
combinations of predictors to
study our outcome variable
It is very common for
scholars to call
different model
specifications as the data
generating process or DGP of the
outcome variable.
And again, with certain
assumptions, OLS is very
powerful and can produce
unbiased estimates for the
intercept and slopes.
The fitted regression line based
on the estimated intercept and
the slopes can also produce the
smallest sum of squared errors
or squared residuals, which
means the least squares linear
regression can provide us with
the unbiased
results, first, with smallest errors
or residuals,
second. These are the two very
attractive properties of OLS
regression technique.
OLS, at the same time.
is also powerful because it
can model or describe more
complicated data generating
process such that the
statistical relationship between
the outcome and our predictors
may not be as a simple straight
line.
We can do this when we include
some very unique terms in
regression model such as
interaction or quadratic and
polynomial terms.
Sometimes you may have heard
people saying we need to use
generalized linear models to
study statistical
relationship, which can either
be correlation or causality
depending on the assumptions or
the conditions or the data
structure we have.
But it is only part of the
story.
The least squares linear
regression can actually model
nonlinear statistical relationship
as I just mentioned.
To demonstrate why
OLS can fail or can.
To demonstrate why, OLS can fail or can no longer be our
ideal modeling choice when it
comes to binary or binomial
dependent variables, we can
start by considering a scenario
To demonstrate why OLS may not be
our ideal modeling choice
we can start by considering a
scenario in which we are trying
to study a by binary or binomial
response/dependent variable.
A binary variable is a variable
that can only take the value of
zero or one to represent either
yes/no or a success/fail
situation.
Voter turnout is an excellent
example in this regard, because
a voter can either vote in the
elections or stay home and does not
vote in the elections.
In this case, a binary variable
essentially is a nominal or
categorical variable.
A binomial variable, in contrast,
A binomial variable, in contrast, is a
variable calculating the number
of yeses or successes in several
identical, independent trials
with a constant probability of
having success
or yes. We'll talk more about
probability in the moment, but
usually a probability will be
between zero and one.
Say if based on our data in a
constituency, we see five out of
10 eligible voters went to
cast their vote
conventionally,
we can say 50% of voters turned
out in the elections, but using
the jargon of probability, we
can also say the probability of
a voter turning out is 0.5,
using the data we just described.
As a result, a binomial
variable can be considered as a
continuous variable between zero
and one.
Conceptually, binary and
binomial variables are not
really the same, but to
understand the binomial variable
will require some basic
understanding of the probability
theory.
Also, from the data analytical
point of view, binary and
binomial variables are not that
much different. Let's
use voter
turnout as an example to illustrate
this point.
Although conceptually we can
define voter turnout as a
binary or binomial variable,
in practice, we will have to
create a binary variable in our
dataset and use 1 and 0 to
indicate whether or not voters
on voted or did not vote,
respectively, and using the
binary variable of voter turnout as our response
variable in the regression,
especially in logit regression.
As such, I will use binary
variable for the following
discussions.
Before I continue, I must also
highlight two caveats.
First, treating voter turnout
as a binomial variable requires
us to assume some situations
that can be very implausible in
real life.
First, we have to assume each
voter's decision to turn out is
independent of each other.
In other words, my decision to
vote in one election has nothing
to do with your decision to vote
in this particular election.
And this assumption is obviously
not very
not very realistic as our voting
behavior, including our vote
choices, can be easily
influenced by our relatives and
friends, or even colleagues. Next,
even if each voter's decision to
turn out is independent of each
other, we're also have to assume
everybody turns out with the
same probability, which again is
very unrealistic.
We will return to the discussion
on these assumptions at the end
of this lecture.
Second,
You saw that I was using the
example that five out of 10
voters turned out to vote to
infer the probability of a
voter's decision to turn out.
This is actually a very specific
way to understanding and
describing probability and some
quantitative scholars may not
agree with this.
We're not going to cover very
much about the debate here, but
the only thing you should know
is we may need to use another
statistical paradigm if we
formulate a probability in a
different way.
So now after we explain the
definition of binary and
binomial variable, we can now
disturb after we explained the
after we explained the definition of binary and the
binomial variables, we can now
demonstrate why the linear
regression will become
problematic when we have a
binary variable that can only
take the value of 0 and 1.
Here I'm going to provide two
most intuitive reasons and in
the following two slides I will
also provide visualized
illustration.
But first, the reason why OLS can fail is because
a linear function of a binary
response variable can produce
unrealistic predicted outcome.
To put that in a different way,
if we use OLS to study a
binary outcome, the fitted line
will include values below 0 and
above 1 along with the Y axis.
The second reason is we can no
longer satisfy the assumptions
we need for the least squares
linear regression when the
outcome variable is either zero
or one.
That is because the variance of Y
the outcome variable will no
longer be the same across all
levels and values of X, our
predictor.
Consider the scatterplot with
two different regression lines.
The straight line is the fitted
line given by the least squares
linear regression and a dash
line is a fitted line provided
by logit regression.
A quick a quick look, a quick
comparison between these two
regression lines can already
tell us logit
regression provides a better fit
to the data when for each
observation of the dependent
variable can only be 01.
But if we take a closer look at
a straight line, you can also
see that OLS can generate
predicted outcome, or predicted Y
above 1 and below 0, which
in this case makes no sense at
all
Likewise, you can also see the
variance of Y is not the
same across different levels of
values of X.
The variance of Y is quite small
when X is close to either minus
five or positive 10 and will get
bigger when we move close to the
midpoint of X.
In other words, now we can
actually use the value of X to
predict the residuals, which is
a clear violation of the
homoskedasticity assumption for
the least squares linear
regression.
Now we know
OLS may not be the best of
regression estimator
we should use. In this part,
I'm going to use four steps to
explain the basic setup of
logit regression, and how to
interpret
the estimated coefficients, or
estimated slopes in particular.
In the first step, we will need
to change the way we think about
binary outcome variables.
More specifically, we would need
to consider binary outcomes
through the lens of probability.
Next, I will explain how to
transform probability into log
odds.
Before introducing logit
regression, as a spoiler alert,
logit regression allows us to
study binary outcome variable
because they use a very specific
function to transform
probability into log odds and
consider log odds as a linear
function of our predictors.
As a result of this
transformation process, the
interpretation of the estimated
slopes can be very challenging.
So I will explain the process we
have to take to read the
estimated slopes very carefully
and slowly in the final step.
So I will explain the process we
take
So I will explain the process
we have to take to read the
estimated slopes very carefully
and the slowly in the final
step.
Let us start by treating the
binary variable, which can again
take the value of either zero or
one as a probability.
OK, can use lower p, more
specifically, to present the
probability of our outcome takes
the value of 1.
As you can see at the bottom of
this slide, we can use capital P
with parenthesis.
As you can see at the bottom of
this slide, we can use capital P
with parenthesis and put Y=1
in the parentheses.
As you can see at the bottom of
the slide I put on P (Y=1) to
represent on the probability of Y=1.
As you can see at the bottom of
the slide, we can use capital P
with parenthesis to put y = 1
there to show the probability of
Y
takes the value of 1.
To note to the probability of Y
taking the value of 1
The main objective, simply put,
using logit regression is to
study our binary outcome
variable as the probability of
Y taking the value of 1 or the
probability of the event of our
interest taking place because we
use one to represent the
occurrence of the giving event.
According to the probability
axioms.
Keep in mind any probability can
only be between zero and one,
and the sum of the probability
of one event happening and the
probability of this particular
event not happening should
always be one.
These are the mathematical
properties we need in a
minute.
So now we can convert the
probability into log odds. log
odds, by definition, is the log of
odds.
If the probability of one event
happening is denoted by lower
p, then the odds of this
event happening is divided is
defined by
The odds of this event happening
is defined as lower p divided by 1 minus
lower p. The idea here is to get
a sense of the chance of one
event taking place relative to
the opposite scenario, which is
this event does not take place.
We can use one example to
illustrate
the difference between
probability and odds.
So say today the probability of
raining is .8, which is perhaps
not unusual
for London, then we know the
probability of now raining is
.2.
Using the axioms we just
discussed in the previous slide,
the odds of raining today will
then be 0.8 divided by 0.2, which equals
4.
This number basically tells us
it is four times more likely to
be rainy today, then not
rainy.
We can then derive the log odds
or the log of odds by taking the
natural log of these odds, which
is 4. Natural log,
mathematically speaking, is a
log transformation with the base
of lower e here and lower e here
refers to a mathematical
constant
we use a lot for log operations in algebra.
You may be wondering why we have
to take so many steps to
transform the dependent variable
from a binary variable to log
odds
You'll see that in a minute, but
if we can show the relationship,
if we can show the relationship
between a probability between
zero and one and the
corresponding log odds, you can
see that transforming
probability into log odds
basically helps us
You may be wondering why we have to
take so many steps to transform
the dependent variable into log
odds
You'll see that in the next
slide, but if we can visualize
the relationship between a
probability between zero and
one
But if we can plot the relationship between a
probability between zero and one and
the corresponding log odds, you
can see that transforming
probability into logouts allows
us to get around one of the
issues we just mentioned before
that makes OLS failed for binary
outcome variables. When a binary
outcome variable or a
probability can only be
constrained between zero and
one, which makes any predictions
below one and above one
unacceptable.
Now log odds is no longer
constrained between zero and
one.
If you take a look at the
vertical axis.
And this is the magic of logit regression.
Intuitively speaking, logit regression allows us to use a
linear function to model log odds.
In other words, log odds can be represented as a linear function
of our predictors.
The process or the function we use to transform our original
binary variables in to log odds is the "logit link function" or
the "logit function."
Logit regression obtains its name
because we will have to use the
logit function to transform the
original dependent variable
so it can be modeled or
represented with a linear
function.
In addition to larger
regression, there are many other
generalized linear models out
there, but each of these
generalized linear models shares
one thing.
They use different link
functions to transform the
outcome variable, so the outcome
variables can be modeled as a
linear function of our
predictors. Using the same logic,
a generalized linear model where
the corresponding link function
keeps the original outcome
variable
the same is just the least
squares linear function or
OLS.
This tells you that OLS is
actually one of the generalized
linear models.
Although many researchers have
been using the type of dependent
variable to decide their
modeling choices, which leads to
a very popular perception that
we must use logit regression
when our dependent variable
is zero or one, it is still very
crucial that we are transparent
about the assumptions we have to
take for logit regression.
The textbook has used the
different examples to discuss
the assumptions of logit
regression, and here I would
just highlight three most
important ones.
The reason why I want to
highlight this assumptions is
because these assumptions are no
less unrealistic or
controversial
compared with the assumptions we
need for the least squares
linear regression. In
particular, two assumptions here
can be very, very contested.
For one thing, as we have
discussed, using voter turnout
as the example, it is very hard
for us to imagine the occurrence
of a particular event for all
observations in the dataset is
independent of each other.
Also, if you think about the third
assumption more carefully, it
can be a bit strong or
unrealistic to assume the
log odds of a probability must be
a linear function of our
predictors.
Although logging regression
provides us with a convenient
modeling technique to study
binary dependable
to study binary dependent variables, it
can be very tricky to interpret
the estimated coefficients,
especially when it comes to the
estimated slopes.
So here I'm going to demonstrate
a process step by step and use
one example in the end to
illustrate how we
should understand or interpret
the estimated coefficients
given by logit regression.
We're also going to use the
problem sets to reinforce our
understanding of the procedures we
need to take to understand or
report on the results from logit
regression.
Now consider this simple
bivariate logit regression. The
lower p here again is the
probability that the outcome
variable equals one. The logit
link regression
The logit link function allows
us to transform this probability
into log of odds of the
dependent variable.
The logit link function allows
us to transform this probability
into a log odds. Using the same
logic we used to interpret the
estimated slope for least squares
linear regression, which says
the slope corresponds to the
changes on the left hand side (i.e., Y).
When we move the predictor by 1
unit, say from zero to one OR
from one to two (our initial
starting point
does not matter here so long
as we move X by 1 unit).
Therefore, we can see that our
beta, the beta estimated by
logit regression, should
correspond to beta changes in
log odds when we move X by 1
unit.
Here we can use X equals 0 and 1
for the purpose of illustration.
In other words,
beta should be considered as a
difference between two different
log odds.
One log odds is for X = 1 and
the other log odds is for equals.
The other log odds is for X = 0.
The difference between two
different log odds is the same as
the log of one odds divided by the
other (odds).
This operation is possible
using one basic rule of
logarithm.
And finally, using the basic
rules of logarithm, again we can
take the exponent of beta to
derive the fraction in which one
odds was divided by the other.
The right hand side of this
very last equation is odds
ratio.
Our interpretation will be based
on this odds ratio, or simply
put, the exponent of the
estimated slope. And we can carry
out the calculation very easily
in R.
So let's use a real example to
reinforce
our understanding.
Say we have collected data from
a political party in a country
for the past 100 elections
across different years
and we want to understand the correlation
between the number of hours or
parties spent on televised
campaign(s) and the election
results, which can either be the
party winning or losing the
elections.
In other words, we want to know
if the number of hours for
televised commercials is
correlated with the probability
that a party wins elections.
The predictor here is the number
of hours the the party spends on TV
campaigns and the outcome
variable is a binary variable
that takes the value of 1 if the
party wins.
Suppose we obtain the estimated
slope as 0.33 based on the data
we have and based on the
discussion in the previous
slide, we know the odds ratio is
the exponent of this particular
number 0.33, which is about 1.39.
So here's the question.
What does this result tell us?
Should we recommend a party
spend more money on increasing
the hours of televised campaigns
to increase their chance of
winning elections?
Well, keep in mind the odds ratio is a ratio of two
different odds.
The odds in that new the odds in
a numeric the odds in a new
The odds in the numerator can be considered as
the odds of winning when the
party spends one hour on TV
campaigns and the odds in the
denominator can be considered as
the odds of winning when the
party spends zero hour on TV
campaigns.
Therefore, if the odds ratio is
larger than one, it means that
an the numerator is larger than
the denominator.
Which means the odds of winning
goes up when the party spends
one additional hour of televised
campaigns.
Therefore, in conclusion, we
know the party definitely should
spend more hours promoting their
candidates or parties on TV.
The table here basically lists
all three possible scenarios
when we try to read any
odds ratio, if the odds ratio is
one, we will know increasing the
hour of campaigning on TV by one
hour does not really change
the odds of winning. If the odds
ratio is smaller than one, then
we will know
increasing the hour of campaigning
by one will actually reduce the
odds of winning elections for
the party.
So far we have covered
the basic setup of lottery
regression and some key
principles of statistical
inference for logit regression
before I conclude this lecture,
let me wrap up some loose ends.
First
we're going to work on the
problem set to demonstrate how
to conduct significant tests on
outrageous, but the same
statistical tools we use for
linear regression, such as the p
value or countless intervals,
are still applicable.
We can also use similar tools to
carry out the model comparison.
However, it might be tricky to
evaluate the model fit for logit
and other nonlinear generalized models, and we will discuss
this in detail in class.
Next odds ratios are for sure a
very obscure and challenging
statistical concept,
we will have to discuss how to
use predicted probability as the
alternative to report your
results from logit regression.
Finally, I would like to
challenge the conventional
wisdom that we can only use
logit or probit regression to
study binary outcome variable.
Probit regression is very
similar to logit regression
because it also involves
using a different link function
to transform the original binary
dependent variable
so we can still use the linear function to model (it).
we can still use the linear function to model the outcome,
the transformed outcome.
So we can still use linear function to study or estimate or
model the transformed outcome using the probit link function.
Quant scholars in some subject areas are very strict about
using logit or probit regression when the outcome
variable can only be zero or one.
But it is important to recognize now every quant researcher
But it is very important to recognize not every single
quant researcher shares this view.
For one thing, it has been very clear that logit
regression can also have unrealistic assumptions.
Also, it is possible to use linear regression to study
binary outcomes as we have come up with some other tools to
address the pitfalls we highlighted before, especially
the violation of the homoscedasticity assumption. When
we use the linear regression model to to study binary
outcomes, we will call it a linear probability model.
Finally, a recent review article by sociologists at Oxford
University highlighted some other caveats
Finally, a recent review article also highlighted some of the
caveats when we use logit and other nonlinear regression
models.
A recent review article also highlighted some other caveats
when we use logit and other nonlinear regression models. The
review article is quite technical, but the key takeaway
lesson here is generalized linear models, especially for
the nonlinear ones, can create very biased results compared with
the linear regression model when the model
does not include some very important predictors, which
actually we will never know for sure.
And the set up for nonlinear
models can make the estimated
coefficients across different
models using the same data not
comparable.
So here is the list of some very common
So here is the list of some very common generalized selenium models.
in practice or applied quant social research
here is the list of some very common generalized linear models in
practical or applied quant
social Research, as I have
mentioned, these generalized
linear models use different link
functions to transform different
types of dependent variables, so
they can be modeled by a linear
function of predictors.
If you want to see how you can
use R to apply these different
models, the examples provided by
UCLA Statistical Methods and
Data Analytics initiative are very
thorough and easy to follow.
If you want to learn more about underlying mathematical
reasoning of these different
models, please read the book
written by a professor, Andrew
Gelman, and his coauthors
published in 2020.
Finally, please allow me to use
George Box to conclude our
discussion in this lecture.
These two sections are retrieved
from his 1976 article.
These two sections are very
relevant to the points that I've
been
making over and over again -- all
models are wrong, but some
models are useful.
The key is to know the pros and
cons of different modeling
choices and (be) clear about the
assumptions you have to take,
and it become a well informed
quant social researchers.
Thank you very much for listening.
I'm going to see you in class.